Chapters 5 through 8 of the Gospel of John This is a LibriVox recording. All LibriVox
recordings are in the public domain. For more information or to volunteer, please visit
LibriVox.org. Recording by Simon Wainwright. The Gospel of John. King James Version. Chapter 5.
After this, there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. Now there is,
Jerusalem by the sheep market, a pool, which is called in the Hebrew tongue Bethesda,
having five porches. In these lay a great multitude of impotent folk, of blind,
halt, withered, waiting for the moving of the water. For an angel went down at a certain season
into the pool, and troubled the water. Whosoever then, after the troubling of the water,
stepped in, was made whole of whatever dis-ease he had. And a certain man was there, which had
infirmity thirty and eight years. When Jesus saw him lie, and knew that he had been now a long time
in that case, he sayeth unto him, Wilt thou be made whole? The impotent man answered him, Sir,
I have no man when the water is troubled to put me into the pool. But while I am coming
another stepeth down before me. Jesus sayeth unto him, Rise, take up thy bed, and walk.
And immediately the man was made whole, and took up his bed, and walked, and on the same day
was the Sabbath. The Jews therefore said unto him that was cured, It is the Sabbath day,
it is not lawful for thee to carry thy bed. He answered them, He that made me whole, the same,
said unto me, Take up thy bed, and walk. Then asked they him, What man is that which said unto
thee, Take up thy bed, and walk? And he that was healed, wist not who it was, for Jesus had
conveyed himself away, a multitude being in that place. Afterward Jesus findeth him in the temple,
and said unto him, Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee.
The man departed, and told the Jews that it was Jesus which had made him whole. And therefore did
Jews persecute Jesus, and sought to slay him, because he had done these things on the Sabbath
day. But Jesus answered them, My father worketh hither too, and I work. Therefore the Jews sought
the more to kill him, because he not only had broken the Sabbath, but said also that God was
his father, making himself equal with God. Then answered Jesus, and said unto them,
Verily, verily, I say unto you, The son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the father
do. For what things soever he doeth, these also doeth the son likewise. For the father loveth the son,
and showeth him all things that himself doeth, and he will show him greater works than these
that ye may marvel. For as the father raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth them, even so the son
quickeneth whom he will. For the father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the son,
that all men shall honor the son, even as they honor the father. He that honoreth not the son,
honoreth not the father which hath sent him. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that heareth my word,
and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation,
but is passed from death unto life. Verily, verily, I say unto you, the hour is coming,
and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live.
For as the father hath life in himself, so hath he given the son to have life in himself,
and hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man. Marvel not at
this, for the hour is coming, in which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall
come forth, they that have done good unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil
unto the resurrection of damnation. I can of mine own self do nothing, as I hear I judge,
and my judgment is just, because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath
sent me. If I bear witness of myself, my witness is not true. There is another that beareth witness
of me, and I know that the witness which he witnesseth of me is true. Ye sent unto John,
and bear witness unto the truth, but I receive not testimony from man, but these things I say,
that ye might be saved. He was a burning and shining light, and ye were willing for a season
to rejoice in his light. But I have greater witness than that of John, for the works which
the Father hath given me to finish, the same works that I do bear witness of me, that the Father
hath sent me, and the Father himself which hath sent me, hath borne witness of me. Ye
have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape, and ye have not his word
abiding in you, for whom he hath sent him ye believe not. Search the scriptures, for in them
ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they which testify of me, and ye will not come to me
that ye might have life. I receive not honor from men, but I know you that ye have not the love of
God in you. I am come in my Father's name, and ye receive me not. If another shall come in his own
name, him ye will receive. How can ye believe which receive honor one of another, and seek not
the honor that cometh from God only? Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father.
There is one that accuseth you, even Moses, in whom ye trust. For had ye believed Moses,
ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me. But if ye believe not his writings,
how shall ye believe my words? Chapter 6
After these things, Jesus went over the Sea of Galilee, which is the Sea of Tiberias,
and a great multitude followed him, because they saw his miracles, which he did on them
that were diseased. And Jesus went up into a mountain, and there he sat with his disciples,
and the Passover, a feast of the Jews, was nigh. When Jesus then lifted up his eyes,
and saw a great company come unto him, he saith unto Philip, Whence shall we buy bread that these
may eat? And this he said to prove him, for he himself knew what he would do. Philip answered
him, Two hundred penny worth of bread is not sufficient for them, that every one of them
may take a little. One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, saith unto him,
There is a lad here which hath five barley loaves and two small fish, but what are they
among so many? And Jesus said, Make the men sit down. Now there was much grass in the place,
so the men sat down, in number about five thousand. And Jesus took the loaves,
and when he had given thanks, he distributed to the disciples, and the disciples to them that were
set down, and likewise of the fish, as many as they would. When they were filled, he said unto
the disciples, Gather up the fragments that remain, that nothing be lost. Therefore they
gathered them together, and filled twelve baskets with the fragments of the five barley loaves, which
remained over and above unto them that had eaten. Then those men, when they had seen the miracle
that Jesus did, said, This is of a truth, that profit, that should come into the world.
When Jesus therefore perceived that they would come and take him by force to make him a king,
he departed again into a mountain himself alone. And when even was now come, his disciples went
down unto the sea, and entered into a ship, and went over the sea toward Capernaum. And it was
now dark, and Jesus was not come to them. And the sea arose by reason of a great wind that blew.
So when they had rowed about five and twenty or thirty furlongs, they see Jesus walking on the water,
and they were afraid. But he sayeth unto them, It is I, be not afraid. Then they willingly received
him into the ship, and immediately the ship was at the land whither they went. The day following
when the people which stood on the other side of the sea saw that there was none other boat there,
save that one wherein his disciples were entered, and that Jesus went not with his disciples into
the boat, but that his disciples were gone away alone, howbeit there came other boats from Tiberias
nigh unto the place where they did eat bread after that the Lord had given thanks. When the people
therefore saw that Jesus was not there, neither his disciples, they also took shipping, and came
to Capernaum seeking for Jesus. And when they had found him on the other side of the sea,
they said unto him, Rabbi, when camest thou hither? Jesus answered them and said, Verily,
verily, I say unto you, Ye seek me, not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the
boats, and were filled, labor not for the meat which perisheth, but for that meat which endureth
unto everlasting life, which the Son of Man shall give unto you, for him hath God the Father sealed.
Then said they unto him, What shall we do, that we might work the works of God?
Jesus answered and said unto them, This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he hath
sent. They said therefore unto him, What sign showest thou then, that we may see and believe thee?
What dost thou work? Our fathers did eat manna in the desert, as it is written,
He gave them bread from heaven to eat. Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you,
Moses gave you not that bread from heaven, but my Father giveth you the true bread from heaven.
For the bread of God is he which cometh down from heaven, and giveth life unto the world.
Then said they unto him, Lord, evermore give us this bread. And Jesus said unto them, I am
the bread of life. He that cometh to me shall never hunger, and he that believeth on me shall
never thirst. But I said unto you, that ye also have seen me and believed not. All that the Father
giveth me shall come to me, and him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out. For I came down
from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. And this is the Father's will
which hath sent me, that of all which he hath given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up
again at the last day. And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one that seeth the Son
and believeth on him may have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day.
The Jews then murmured at him, because he said, I am the bread which came down from heaven.
And they said, is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know?
How is it then that he sayeth I came down from heaven? Jesus therefore answered and said unto them,
murmur not among yourselves, no man can come to me except the Father which hath sent me draw him,
and I will raise him up at the last day. It is written in the prophets, and they shall be all
taught of God, every man therefore that hath heard and hath learned of the Father cometh unto me.
Not that any man hath seen the Father, save he which is of God, he hath seen the Father.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believeth on me hath everlasting life. I am that bread of
life. Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness and are dead. This is the bread which cometh down
from heaven, that a man may eat thereof and not die. I am the living bread which came down from
heaven. If any man eat of this bread, he shall live forever, and the bread that I will give
is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. The Jews therefore strove among themselves
saying, how can this man give us his flesh to eat? Then Jesus said unto them, verily, verily, I say
unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, ye have no life in you.
Whosoever eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood hath eternal life, and I will raise him up at the
last day. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. He that eateth my flesh and
drinketh my blood dwelleth in me and I in him, as the living Father hath sent me, and I live by the
Father, so he that eateth me, even he shall live by me. This is that bread which came down from
heaven, not as your fathers did eat manna and are dead. He that eateth of this bread shall live
forever. These things said he in the synagogue as he taught in Capernaum. Many therefore of his
disciples when they had heard this said, this is an hard saying, who can hear it? When Jesus knew
in himself that his disciples murmured at it, he said unto them, doth this offend you? What? And
ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before? It is the spirit that quickeneth,
the flesh profiteth nothing. The words that I speak unto you, they are spirit and they are life.
But there are some of you that believe not. For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were that
believed not and who should betray him. And he said, therefore said I unto you, that no man can
come unto me except it were given unto him of my father. From that time many of his disciples went
back and walked no more with him. Then said Jesus unto the twelve, will ye also go away? Then
Simon Peter answered him, Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou hast the words of eternal life.
And we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God.
Jesus answered them, have not I chosen you twelve? And one of you is a devil. He spake of Judas
Iscariot, the son of Simon. For he it was that should betray him, being one of the twelve.
Chapter seven. After these things Jesus walked in Galilee. For he would not walk in jewelry because
the Jews sought to kill him. Now the Jews' feast of Tabernacle was at hand. His brethren therefore
said unto him, depart hence and go into Judea that thy disciples also may see the works
that thou doest. For there is no man that doeth anything in secret and he himself seeketh to be
known openly. If thou do these things, show thyself to the world. For neither did his brethren believe
in him. Then Jesus said unto them, my time is not yet come, but your time is always ready.
The world cannot hate you, but me it hateth, because I testify of it that the works thereof
are evil. Go ye up unto this feast. I go not up yet unto this feast, for my time is not yet full come.
When he had said these words unto them, he abode still in Galilee. But when his brethren were gone
up, then went he also up unto the feast, not openly, but as it were in secret. Then the Jews
sought him at the feast and said, where is he? And there was much murmuring among the people
concerning him. For some said he is a good man, others said nay, but he deceived the people.
Howbeit no man spake openly of him for fear of the Jews. Now about the midst of the feast,
Jesus went up into the temple and taught. And the Jews marveled, saying, how knoweth this man
betters, having never learned. Jesus answered them, and said, My doctrine is not mine,
but his that sent me. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine,
whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself. He that speaketh of himself seeketh
his own glory. But he that seeketh his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness
is in him. Did not Moses give you the law, and yet none of you keepeth the law? Why go ye about
to kill me? The people answered and said, Thou hast a devil, who goest about to kill thee?
Jesus answered and said unto them, I have done one work, and ye all marvel. Moses therefore
gave unto you circumcision, not because it is of Moses, but of the fathers. And ye on the Sabbath
day circumcise a man. If a man on the Sabbath day receive circumcision, that the law of Moses
should not be broken, are ye angry at me, because I have made a man every whit whole on the Sabbath
day? Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment. Then said some of them
of Jerusalem, Is not this he whom they seek to kill? But lo, he speaketh boldly, and they say
nothing unto him. Do the rulers know indeed that this is the very Christ? Howbeit we know
this man whence he is, but when Christ cometh, no man knoweth whence he is. Then cried Jesus
in the temple as he taught, saying, Ye both know me, and ye know whence I am, and I am not come
of myself. But he that sent me is true, whom ye know not, but I know him, for I am from him,
and he hath sent me. Then they sought to take him, but no man laid hands on him, because his hour
was not yet come. And many of the people believed on him, and said, When Christ cometh,
will he do more miracles than these which this man hath done? The Pharisees heard that the people
murmured such things concerning him, and the Pharisees and the chief priests sent officers
to take him. Then said Jesus unto them, Yet a little while am I with you, and then I go
unto him that sent me. Ye shall seek me and shall not find me, and where I am thither
ye cannot come. Then said the Jews among themselves, Whither will he go that we shall
not find him? Will he go unto the dispersed among the Gentiles and teach the Gentiles?
What manner of saying is this that he said, Ye shall seek me and shall not find me,
and where I am thither ye cannot come? In the last day, the great day of the feast,
Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink.
He that believeth on me, as the scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers
of living water. But this spake he of the Spirit which they that believe on him should receive,
for the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified. Many of the
people therefore, when they heard this saying, said of a truth, This is the prophet. Others said,
This is the Christ. But some said, Shall Christ come out of Galilee? Hath not the scripture said
that Christ cometh of the seed of David, and out of the town of Bethlehem, where David was?
So there was a division among the people because of him, and some of them would have taken him,
but no man laid hands on him. Then came the officers to the chief priests and Pharisees,
and they said unto them, Why have ye not brought him? The officers answered, Never man spake like
this man. Then answered them the Pharisees, Are ye also deceived? Have any of the rulers or
of the Pharisees believed on him? But this people who knoweth not the law are cursed.
Nicodemus saith unto them, He that came to Jesus by night, being one of them, doth our law
judge any man before it hear him, and know what he doeth. They answered and said unto him, Art thou
also of Galilee? Search and look, for out of Galilee ariseth no prophet. And every man went
unto his own house.
Jesus went unto the Mount of Olives, and early in the morning he came again into the temple,
and all the people came unto him, and he sat down and taught them. And the scribes and the
Pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in adultery, and when they had set her in the midst
they said unto him, Master, this woman was taken in adultery in the very act. Now Moses
in the law commanded us that such should be stoned, but what sayest thou? This they said,
attempting him, that they might have to accuse him. But Jesus duped down, and with his finger
wrote on the ground, as though he heard them not. So when they continued asking him, he lifted up
himself, and said unto them, He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her.
And again he stooped down, and wrote on the ground. And when they which heard it being
convicted by their own conscience, went out one by one, beginning at the eldest, even unto the last.
And Jesus was left alone, and the woman standing in the midst. When Jesus had lifted up himself,
and saw none but the woman, he said unto her, Woman, where are those thine accusers? Hath no
man condemned thee? She said, No man, Lord. And Jesus said unto her, Neither do I condemn thee,
go, and sin no more. Then spake Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of the world,
he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life.
The Pharisees therefore said unto him, Thou bearest record of thyself, thy record is not true.
Jesus answered and said unto them, Though I bear record of myself, yet my record is true,
for I know whence I came, and whither I go. But ye cannot tell whence I come, and whither I go.
Ye judge after the flesh, I judge no man. And yet, if I judge, my judgment is true, for I am not
alone, but I am the Father that sent me. It is also written in your law, that the testimony of two
men is true. I am one that bear witness of myself, and the Father that sent me, beareth witness of me.
Then said they unto him, Where is thy Father? Jesus answered, Ye neither know me nor my Father.
If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also. These words spake Jesus in the treasury,
as he taught in the temple. And no man laid hands on him, for his hour was not yet come.
Then said Jesus again unto them, I go my way, and ye shall seek me, and shall die in your sins.
Whither I go, ye cannot come. Then said the Jews, Will he kill himself? Because he sayeth,
whither I goeth, ye cannot come. And he said unto them, Ye are from beneath, I am from above.
Ye are of this world, I am not of this world. I said therefore unto you, that ye shall die in
your sins. For if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins. Then said they unto him,
Who art thou? And Jesus sayeth unto them, Even the same that I said unto you from the beginning.
I have many things to say, and to judge of you. But he that sent me is true, and I speak to the
world those things which I have heard of him. They understood not that he spake to them of the Father.
Then said Jesus unto them, When ye have lifted up the Son of man, then shall ye know that I am he,
and that I do nothing of myself, but as my Father has taught me. I speak these things,
and he that sent me is with me. The Father hath not left me alone, for I do always those things
that please him. As he spake these words, many believed on him. Then said Jesus to those Jews,
which believed on him. If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed,
and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free. They answered him, We be Abraham
and were never in bondage to any man. How sayest thou? Ye shall be made free.
Jesus answered them, Verily, verily I say unto you, Whosoever committeth sin is the servant of sin,
and the servant abideth not in the house forever, but the Son abideth forever.
If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed. I know that ye are Abraham seed,
but ye seek to kill me, because my word hath no place in you. I speak that which I have seen
with my Father, and ye do that which ye have seen with your Father. They answered and said unto him,
Abraham is our Father. Jesus saith unto them, If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do
the works of Abraham. But now ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you the truth,
which I have heard of God. This did not Abraham. Ye do the deeds of your Father.
Then said they to him, We be not born of fornication. We have one Father, even God.
Jesus said unto them, If God were your Father, ye would love me. For I proceeded forth and came
from God. Neither came I of myself, but he sent me. Why do ye not understand my speech?
Even because ye cannot hear my word. Ye are of your Father the devil, and the lust of your
Father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because
there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own, for he is a liar,
and the Father of it. And because I tell you the truth, ye believe me not. Which of you convinced
me of sin? And if I say the truth, why do ye not believe me? He that is of God heareth God's words.
Ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God. Then answered the Jews and said unto him,
Say we not well, that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a devil. Jesus answered, I have not a devil,
but I honor my Father, and ye do dishonor me. And I seek not my own glory, there is one that seeketh
and judgeth. Verily, verily I say unto you, if a man keep my saying, he shall never see death.
Then said the Jews unto him, now we know that thou hast a devil, Abraham is dead, and the prophets,
and thou sayest, if a man keep my saying, he shall never taste death. Art thou greater than our Father
Abraham, which is dead, and the prophets are dead? Whom makest thou thyself? Jesus answered,
if I honor myself, my honor is nothing. It is my Father that honoreth me, of whom ye say
that he is your God. Yet ye have not known him, but I know him. And if I should say I know him not,
I shall be a liar, like unto you. But I know him, and keep his saying. Your Father Abraham rejoiced
to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad. Then said the Jews unto him, thou art not yet fifty
years old, and hast thou seen Abraham? Jesus said unto them, verily, verily I say unto you,
before Abraham was, I am. Then took they up stones to cast at him, but Jesus hid himself,
and went out of the temple, going through the midst of them, and so passed by.